Racial Disparities among Pedestrian Fatalities within the US

Aims:  Extent literature has demonstrated that non-motorist – pedestrians, bicyclist, and other persons traveling outside traditional vehicles – experience high rates of traffic fatalities. In this paper, penalized Firth logistic regression adjusted modeling was used to investigate associations and risk factors of non-motorist fatalities, by race/ethnicity.

Methodologies: We extracted non-motorist fatal crash data from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administrations’ Fatality Analysis Reporting System. Non-motorist fatalities, dichotomized by race, were assessed as a binary dependent variable. Independent variables included the following factors: FHWA road classifications, road lighting, Census urban/rural, traveling speed, age, sex, and year of fatal crash. Non-motorist fatalities of racial minorities (POCs) were modeled as the event of interest, while our reference category were non-motorist fatalities of Caucasian racial identity. Penalized Firth Logistic Regression modeling was conducted to adjust for event rarity and complete separation. The forward stepwise approach was used to construct a predictable model. Significant covariates, confounders, and interactions were adjusted for within the fitted model. Hosmer – Lemeshow statistical test was performed to assess the logistic regression model goodness of fit. 

Findings:  Our findings suggest that non-motorist fatal crashes of racial minorities were at 28% lower risks (AOR: 0.716, 95% CI [0.603, 0.850]) of occurring in rural areas compared to urban areas. In urban areas, Principal Arterials Interstate pose a 35% higher risk of traffic fatalities, compared to Principal Arterials Non-Interstate (AOR: 1.355, 95% CI [1.230, 1.495). Additionally, lighting conditions served as a risk factor for non-motorist fatal crashes of racial minorities. Non-motorist of racial minority identities had approximately 22% higher risks (AOR: 1.221, 95% CI 1.008, 1.481]) of having “No Lighting” on the roadway compared to Caucasian non-motorist. Furthermore, racial minorities had a 65% higher risks (AOR: 1.647, 95% CI [ 1.35, 2.01]) for non-motorist fatal crashes reported in “Night – Available Lighting” conditions on the roadway, compared to Caucasian non-motorist. The Hosmer-Lemeshow test indicated that constructed model was fitted (p-value 0.712). The fitted model developed herein is a valuable tool that may be used to inform programmatic or policy efforts associated with non-motorist traffic safety. 
